NETWORK
 network can be from 2 computers to 1000 computers in an area, network installd in small home or office are called SOHO(Small Office/Home Office) 
  let you sheare printer documents,pictures,music in that small area network. business and soho provides shared connection of internet.
  local networks are:- small home network,SOHO,medium to large network,wide area network 
   even though soho let you access remotely but size difference refers to number of user(1-10),devices,covered physical area.

DIFFERENT TYPES OF DATA:
  (1) volunteer data :- you know such data is being stored about you
  (2) infered data:-is analysis or conclusion drawn from that observed data cradit card socre.
  (3) observed data :-is data directly captured or measured like networkdevice status,user location.

THE BIT
  Computers use binary codes to represent and interpret letters, numbers and special characters with bits.
  A commonly used code is the American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII). With ASCII, 
each character is represented by eight bits. cuz the human readable lang. must be converted into bits for computer CPU to understand.

COMMON METHOD OF DATA TRANSMISSION 
   after data i s connverted into bits it needs to be converted into signals that can be sent across the network media to its destination.
   media is the way in which we transmit the data ex are copper-wire,fiber-optic cable,electromegnetic-waves from air
   signal consist of electrical or optical patterns that are transmitted from one connected device to another. 


THREE COMMON TRANSMITSSION METHODS:-
   Electrical signals - Transmission is achieved by representing data as electrical pulses on copper wire.
   Optical signals - Transmission is achieved by converting the electrical signals into light pulses.
   Wireless signals  Transmission is achieved by using infrared, microwave, or radio waves through the air.

BANDWIDTH & THROUGHPUT
bandwidth is a capacity of medium that how much data can transfer,digital bandwidth is amount of data that can flow from one place to another
in given amount of time,typically measured in numbers of bits flows in .
seconds common measurement:- thousands of bits per sec(kbps)
                             millions of bits per sec(mbps)
                             billions of bits per sec(gbps)

Throughput Like bandwidth, throughput is the measure of the transfer of bits across the media over a given period of time.
   factors that effect throughput include:-
    - how much data is actually beiing transmitted.
    - the type of data being transmitted.
    -The latency created by the number of network devices encountered between source and destination.

 even if most segments have high bandwidth,only one law-bandwidth segment is enough to slow down the entire network,
 so actuall speed you are getting is reveal by spped tests which is throughput.

CLIENT AND SERVERS 
severs has software installed which enable them to provide information to other hosts web server software and email client.
client has software installed which helps and display info obtained from a server like web browser,email client.

      
    [ Browser ]  <-- HTTP -->  [ Web Server ]
                                      |
                                      | (SMTP)
                                      v
                              [ Email Server ]

                                      |
                                      | (File API / File I/O)
                                      v
                             [ File Storage System ]

PEER-TO-PEER NETWORK :- usually client and server runs on different computers but when both are in the same it is called as peer-to-peer network.

    Advantages:-
         - Easy to set up
         - Less complex
         - Lower cost because network devices and dedicated servers may not be required
         - Can be used for simple tasks such as transferring files and sharing prithnters

    Disadvantages of peer-to-peer networking:-
           - No centralized administration
           - Not as secure
           - Not scalable
           -All devices may act as both clients and servers which can slow their performance

    -Hybrid P2P systems use a central server ONLY to store an index of resources.
    -Peers search the server for who has the file, but the file transfer itself happens directly between peers.

NETWORK INFRASTRUCTUR
     Endpoint device :-A device used by the user and where data starts or ends.
     Intermediate device :-A device that sits in between endpoints and moves data from one place to another.ex:-router,hub,switch etc.
     Network media:-The physical or wireless path through which data travels.ex:-bluetooth,cellular etc.

ISP
    network that participate directly in network communication are classified as hosts. hosts can send and receive msg on the network.
    cable and dsl this both are most common method of network connection
 cable:-mostly provided by televison service provider internet signels are provide on same coaixel cable internet runs from this cables separates internet 
        digital signal from other signal carried on cable and provides connectivity throgh ethernet wires. 
 DSL:- Digital Subscriber Line provides a high bandwidth, always on, connection to the internet. 
     -It requires a special high-speed modem that separates the DSL signal from the telephone signal and provides an Ethernet connection to a host computer or LAN.
    - DSL is providerd from telephone  cable line devided into three channel 1st channel is for phone call which allow user to use internet without disconnecting
      on call 2nd is faster download channel used  for responding,3rd channel is used for uploading and this channel is slightly slower than the download channel.
    -the speed and quality of internet speed depends on the telephone line and the distence from centeral office of your phone company the farther you are from 
     central office the slower the speed.

  Other connectivity services are:-cellular,satelite,dial-up telephone.
  Bluetooth:-is a low-power, shorter range wireless technology that is intended to replace wired connectivity,it can transmit both data and voice.

  Tethering:- is the process of sharing your smartphone's cellular data connection with other devices, such as a laptop or tablet, to give them internet access,
             It effectively turns your phone into a mobile hotspot or modem, allowing you to connect to the internet via Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or a USB cable when a 
             traditional Wi-Fi network isn't available.

     -small business and home router has mainly 2 types of ports :- Ethernet(LAN PORTS)  and internet(WAN ports) 
       so many wired Technologies but these 3 types are most common cable connectivity methods:-
                     1)A) Twisted Pair (Ethernet cable) (Cat5/5e/6/7/8 , RJ45 connector)(used in LANs)
                     2)coxial cable (used for tv,cable connection,cctv)
                     3)fiber-opticable cable(high speed,long distence)
     -in addition to wired ports wireless connectivity include antenna and build-in access point.
     -The wireless technologies most frequently used in home networks are in the unlicensed 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz frequency ranges.
     -Wi-Fi radio waves are just microwave-frequency electromagnetic waves.

 IEEE stands for institute of electrical & electronics engineers formed in fabruary 1980.(IEEE 802 stands for 1980 and feb(2) ) its official standerd for 
  family of network standerds.
 ex:- 802.1 -->Layer 2-->network management(VLAs etc)
      802.2 -->layer2--> logical link control(LLC)
      802.16 -->Layer1/2-->wiMAX (wireless,broadband)
       Inside 802.11, there are versions (b, g, n, ac, ax, etc.).




  


